
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# lnmixsurv

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/vitorcapdeville/persistencia/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/vitorcapdeville/persistencia?branch=master)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/vivianalobo/lnmixsurv/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/vivianalobo/lnmixsurv/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
<!-- badges: end -->

The `lnmixsurv` package provides an easy interface to the Bayesian
lognormal mixture model proposed by Lobo, Fonseca and Alves, 2023. 

@article{lobo_fonseca_alves_2023, title={Lapse risk modeling in insurance: a Bayesian mixture approach}, DOI={10.1017/S1748499523000180}, journal={Annals of Actuarial Science}, author={Lobo, Viviana G. R. and Fonseca, Thaís C. O. and Alves, Mariane B.}, year={2023}, pages={1–26}}.

An usual formula-type model is implemented in `survival_ln_mixture`,
with the usual `suvival::Surv()` interface. The model tries to follow
the [conventions for R modeling
packages](https://tidymodels.github.io/model-implementation-principles/),
and uses the [hardhat](https://hardhat.tidymodels.org/) structure.

The underlying algorithm implementation is a Gibbs sampler which takes
initial values from a small run of the EM-Algorithm. The samplers are
implemented in `C++` using `RcppArmadillo` for the linear algebra
operations, `RcppGSL` for the random number generation and `OpenMP` for
parallellization.

## Dependencies

Before proceeding, make sure to have
[GSL](https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/) and OpenMP, if using Mac OS,
installed on your system. Specifically, on Mac OS, `brew install gsl`
should be enough for GSL. On Windows/Linux, these probably came by
default or together with the R install. If any errors occur, please,
contact us.

### OpenMP – Mac OS

The default compiler of Mac OS (clang) is shipped without support to
OpenMP. Thus, installing the package directly might result in error. One
option is to compile the package using **GCC**. To do so, make sure GCC
is installed with `brew install gcc`. Now, create or edit the file
**\~/.R/Makevars** to include the lines

> CC = gcc
>
> CPP = g++

Then, restart R session (or open one) and try to install the package
again.

If the method before didn’t work, it’s worth trying out what is
described [here](https://mac.r-project.org/openmp/). Before proceeding,
make sure to have **curl** installed, `brew install curl`. Then, execute

    curl -O https://mac.r-project.org/openmp/openmp-12.0.1-darwin20-Release.tar.gz
    sudo tar fvxz openmp-12.0.1-darwin20-Release.tar.gz -C /

Now, create or edit **\~/.R/Makevars** to include the lines\]

> CPPFLAGS += -Xclang -fopenmp
>
> LDFLAGS += -lomp

The following piece of code can be used to do everything, all at once:

    curl -O https://mac.r-project.org/openmp/openmp-12.0.1-darwin20-Release.tar.gz && sudo tar fvxz openmp-12.0.1-darwin20-Release.tar.gz -C / && mkdir -p ~/.R && echo -e "CPPFLAGS += -Xclang -fopenmp\nLDFLAGS += -lomp" >> ~/.R/Makevars

After that, the package should be installed correctly.

## Installation

You can install the development version of `lnmixsurv` from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("vivianalobo/lnmixsurv")
```

## parsnip and censored extension

An extension to the models defined by
[parsnip](https://parsnip.tidymodels.org/index.html) and
[censored](https://censored.tidymodels.org/articles/examples.html) is
also provided, adding the `survival_ln_mixture` engine to the
`parsnip::survival_reg()` model.

The following models, engines, and prediction type are
available/extended through `persistencia`:

| model        | engine              | time | survival | linear_pred | raw | quantile | hazard |
|:-------------|:--------------------|:-----|:---------|:------------|:----|:---------|:-------|
| survival_reg | survival_ln_mixture | ✖    | ✔        | ✖           | ✖   | ✖        | ✔      |
